collector-span:  added documentation for changing span status in collector (#3772)
open-telemetry/opentelemetry.io: content/en/docs/collector/transforming-telemetry.md

  k8sattributes/default:
```

## Setting a span status

**Processor**:
[transform processor](https://github.com/open-telemetry/opentelemetry-collector-contrib/tree/main/processor/transformprocessor)

Use the transform processor to set a span's status. The following example sets

> the span status to `Ok` when the `http.status_code` attribute is 400:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
the span status to `Ok` when the `http.request.status_code` attribute is 200:
```
I understand it's just an example, but would using an actual HTTP success status code make more sense? It jumped out to me that we're setting the span status to `Ok` when we see a failure status code.

Also, we need to make sure the attribute here lines up with the example.

Reviewer 2: This is intentional, the 400 has probably set `Error` as status code in the SDK code, and then in the collector we want to revert that, explicitly stating that those errors are OK for us.

I agree with the missing `request`

Reviewer: >This is intentional, the 400 has probably set `Error` as status code in the SDK code, and then in the collector we want to revert that, explicitly stating that those errors are OK for us.

Got it, thanks for the explanation. Could we include a short description of our goal here, then? My first impression was that the span was starting with an `Unknown` status code or similar and we wanted to populate it with the correct information.

Reviewer 2: Yes, it would make sense to be a little bit clearer here.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
the span status to `Ok` when the `http.request.status_code` attribute is 200:
```

@Gaurang-Patel please apply this change

Author: Hi @svrnm , it will be like 
```the span status to `Ok` when the `http.request.status_code` attribute is 400:```
 correct? as in example the condition is on 400.

Reviewer 2: exactly! All that needs to be added is that "request"

```yaml

> # The description field allows to set a human-readable message for errors.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
```
We're not modifying the description field here, should we include this comment?

transform:
  error_mode: ignore
  trace_statements:
    - context: span
      statements:

>         - set(status.code, STATUS_CODE_OK) where
>           attributes["http.request.status_code"] == 400

Reviewer: ```suggestion
        - set(status.code, STATUS_CODE_OK) where attributes["http.request.status_code"] == 200
```
Not super important, and it will work like this, but OTTL statements are generally written on a single line. I realize it's a bit long, but is it hard to read in the rendered version if it's like this?

Also, same as another comment, I think we should use a success code or try to explain a scenario where we want failure statuses to be set with an `Ok` span status.

Reviewer 2: I have no concerns with a long code, will eave that to @Gaurang-Patel , @TylerHelmuth and @mx-psi , but see my comment above why 400

Reviewer 3: Agree with a single line.  Although not a requirement of OTTL, it is idiomatic.

Author: I wrote it in single line only but actually it failed formating test , any way we can exclude this line from the test if we want to go with single line ?

Author: thanks @svrnm .

```

You can also use the transform processor to modify the span name based on its

> attributes or extract span attributes from the span name. For examples, see
> `transform processor` test data
> [config.yaml](https://github.com/open-telemetry/opentelemetry-collector-contrib/blob/main/processor/transformprocessor/testdata/config.yaml)
> file.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
attributes or extract span attributes from the span name. For examples, see an example
[config file](https://github.com/open-telemetry/opentelemetry-collector-contrib/blob/9b28f76c02c18f7479d10e4b6a95a21467fd85d6/processor/transformprocessor/testdata/config.yaml)
file for the transform processor.
```
Mostly just minor rewording, feel free to change this if you think it could be improved.

Also, I think we should pin this link to an exact commit. As it stands, if this file is moved in the contrib repo on the main branch, the link will break. I found a commit that should work, but another commit would work as well.

Reviewer 2: Ideally we point people to the most recent version of that file. @chalin if that file gets moved, are we getting informed about that with a 404? I don't think that we are doing that right now.

Reviewer 4: We aren't currently checking and then caching links into GH repos. Do we want to start doing that now?

Reviewer 2: I think especially for links to other otel resources this would be great to have, I am not that worried about outside sources (yet), if this makes things easier in any way

Reviewer 4: I created the following issue to track the additional checking:

- #3994

Reviewer 2: @Gaurang-Patel please apply this change

  k8sattributes/default:
```

## Set status for span

**Processor**:
[span processor](https://github.com/open-telemetry/opentelemetry-collector-contrib/tree/main/processor/spanprocessor)

The
[span processor](https://github.com/open-telemetry/opentelemetry-collector-contrib/tree/main/processor/spanprocessor)
can be used to change span status.

The following setting is required:

- `code:` Represents span status. One of the following values `Unset`, `Error`,
  `Ok`.
- `description:` setting is allowed only for code `Error`.

Example:

> ```yaml

Reviewer 5: I would prefer a more realistic example like this:

```
span/set_status_ok:
  include:
    attributes:
      - key: http.status_code
        value: 400
  status:
    code: "Ok"
```

The example you have below unconditionally sets all spans to an error which is not a scenario most people will look for. They will instead likely look for either a specific span or a condition in which to change the status.

  k8sattributes/default:
```

## Setting a span status

**Processor**:
[span processor](https://github.com/open-telemetry/opentelemetry-collector-contrib/tree/main/processor/spanprocessor)

Use the span processor to set a span's status. The following settings are
available:

- `code`: represents span status, one of:
  - `Ok`
  - `Unset`
  - `Error`
- `description`: status-change description, only allowed when `code` is `Error`

The following example sets the span status to `Ok` when the `http.status_code`
attribute is 400:

```yaml
# The description field allows to set a human-readable message for errors.
span/set_status_ok:
  include:
    attributes:
      - key: http.status_code
        value: 400
  status:
    code: Ok
```

> You can also use the span processor to modify the span name based on its

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
You can also use the transform processor to modify the span name based on its
```

attributes or extract span attributes from the span name. For examples, see

> `span processor` test data

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
`transform processor` test data
```

> [config.yaml](https://github.com/open-telemetry/opentelemetry-collector-contrib/blob/main/processor/spanprocessor/testdata/config.yaml)

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
[config.yaml](https://github.com/open-telemetry/opentelemetry-collector-contrib/blob/main/processor/transformprocessor/testdata/config.yaml)
```

  k8sattributes/default:
```

> ## Set status for span

Reviewer 4: Let's be consistent with the other sections:

```suggestion
## Setting a span status 
```

Reviewer 4: Oh, maybe the section title should actually be 

> ## Setting span attributes

**Processor**:
[span processor](https://github.com/open-telemetry/opentelemetry-collector-contrib/tree/main/processor/spanprocessor)

> The
> [span processor](https://github.com/open-telemetry/opentelemetry-collector-contrib/tree/main/processor/spanprocessor)
> can be used to change span status.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
To change the [status of a span](https://github.com/open-telemetry/opentelemetry-specification/blob/main/specification/trace/api.md#set-status), the
[span processor](https://github.com/open-telemetry/opentelemetry-collector-contrib/tree/main/processor/spanprocessor) can be used.
```

Not a native speaker, but I had the feeling that the other way round it implies that this is all the span processor those, so by putting the thing you want to accomplish (change the span status) first, it's clearer what this is about.

Reviewer 6: Let's get rid of passive voice altogether as per our style recommendations:

```suggestion
You can use the
[span processor](https://github.com/open-telemetry/opentelemetry-collector-contrib/tree/main/processor/spanprocessor)
to change span status.
```

> The following setting is required:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
The following settings are available:
```

> You can use the
> [span processor](https://github.com/open-telemetry/opentelemetry-collector-contrib/tree/main/processor/spanprocessor)
> to change span status.
> 
> The following settings are available:

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
Use the span processor to set a span's status. The following settings are available:
```

> - `code:` Represents span status. One of the following values `Unset`, `Error`,
>   `Ok`.

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
- `code`: represents span status, one of:
  - `Ok`
  - `Unset`
  - `Error`
```

> - `description:` setting is allowed only for code `Error`.

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
- `description`: status-change description, only allowed when `code` is `Error`
```

> Example:

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
The following example sets the span status to `Ok` when the `http.status_code` attribute is 400:
```

```yaml
# Set status allows to set specific status for a given span. Possible values are

> # Ok, Error and Unset as per
> # https://github.com/open-telemetry/opentelemetry-specification/blob/main/specification/trace/api.md#set-status

Reviewer 4: All of this descriptive prose should be part of the main text, outside of the YAML.
@cartermp et al., WDYT?

Also, for the link use https://opentelemetry.io/docs/specs/otel/trace/api/#set-status if you embed it as a comment, otherwise use `/docs/specs/otel/trace/api/#set-status`

```suggestion
# Ok, Error and Unset as per https://opentelemetry.io/docs/specs/otel/trace/api/#set-status
```

Reviewer 5: Eh, I kind of agree, but it's also helpful because if someone just copy-pastes this content, they will see a helpful comment in their config.

Reviewer 6: I tend to like having comments in the YAML config snippets, as it's often where the eyes of our readers will go first. But I also like having the same content in the docs, to have some redundancy.

Author: hi @cartermp , @theletterf  do we need to duplicate the content outside the YAML block?

Reviewer 4: None of the other YAML excerpts have such comments. I'd vote to put it all in the prose, and after, if necessary, we can see which snippet might make sense to include as a YAML comment. WDYT @cartermp and @theletterf?

> # Set status allows to set specific status for a given span. Possible values are
> # Ok, Error and Unset as per
> # https://opentelemetry.io/docs/specs/otel/trace/api/#set-status
> # The description field allows to set a human-readable message for errors.
> # Example below sets status to success only when attribute http.status_code is equal to 400

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
# The description field allows to set a human-readable message for errors.
```

> #Example below sets status to success only when attribute http.status_code is equal to 400

Reviewer 4: Fix spacing. And you might want to line-wrap.

```suggestion
# Example below sets status to success only when attribute http.status_code is equal to 400
```

span/set_status_ok:
  include:
    attributes:
      - key: http.status_code
        value: 400
  status:

>     code: 'Ok'

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
    code: Ok
```

```

> You can also use the span processor also to modify the span name based on its
> attributes or extract span attributes from the span name. See the
> [config.yaml](https://github.com/open-telemetry/opentelemetry-collector-contrib/blob/main/processor/spanprocessor/testdata/config.yaml)
> file for detailed examples on how to use the span processor.

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
You can also use the span processor to modify the span name based on its
attributes or extract span attributes from the span name. For examples, see `spanprocessor` test data 
[config.yaml](https://github.com/open-telemetry/opentelemetry-collector-contrib/blob/main/processor/spanprocessor/testdata/config.yaml)
file.
```

> The span processor also allows to modify the span name based on its attributes
> or extract span attributes from the span name. Refer to
> [config.yaml](https://github.com/open-telemetry/opentelemetry-collector-contrib/blob/main/processor/spanprocessor/testdata/config.yaml)
> for detailed examples on using the processor.

Reviewer 6: ```suggestion
You can also use the span processor also to modify the
span name based on its attributes or extract span attributes
from the span name. See the
[config.yaml](https://github.com/open-telemetry/opentelemetry-collector-contrib/blob/main/processor/spanprocessor/testdata/config.yaml)
file for detailed examples on how to use the span processor.
```
